# MQTT Exercise: Receiving LED Commands

✅ Subscribe to `color_topic(uuid)`

✅ Run `host_client` in parallel in its own terminal. The `host_client` publishes board LED `color` roughly every second.

✅ Verify your subscription is working by logging the information received through the topic.

✅ React to the LED commands by setting the newly received color to the board with `led.set_pixel(/* received color here */)`.

`intro/mqtt/exercise/solution/solution_publ_rcv.rs` contains a solution. You can run it with the following command:

```console
cargo run --example solution_publ_rcv
```

### Encoding and Decoding Message Payloads

The board LED commands are made of three bytes indicating red, green, and blue.
- `enum ColorData` contains a topic `color_topic(uuid)` and the `BoardLed`
- It can convert the `data()` field of an `EspMqttMessage` by using `try_from()`. The message needs first to be coerced into a slice, using `let message_data: &[u8] = &message.data();`


```rust
// RGB LED command

if let Ok(ColorData::BoardLed(color)) = ColorData::try_from(message_data) { /* set new color here */ }
```

## Publish & Subscribe

`EspMqttClient` isn't only responsible for publishing but also for subscribing to topics.

```rust
let subscribe_topic = /* ... */;
client.subscribe(subscribe_topic, QoS::AtLeastOnce)
```

## Handling Incoming Messages


The `message_event` parameter in the handler closure is of type `Result<Event<EspMqttMessage>`.
Since we're only interested in processing successfully received messages, we can make use of deep pattern matching into the closure:

```rust
{{#include ../../intro/mqtt/exercise/examples/solution_publ_rcv.rs:mqtt_client}}
```

In the processing function, you will handle `Complete` messages.

💡 Use Rust Analyzer to generate the missing match arms or match any other type of response by logging an `info!()`.

```rust
{{#include ../../intro/mqtt/exercise/examples/solution_publ_rcv.rs:process_message}}
```

💡 Use a logger to see what you are receiving, for example, `info!("{}", color);` or `dbg!(color)`.

## Extra Tasks

### Implement MQTT with Hierarchical Topics

✅ Work on this if you have finished everything else. We don't provide a full solution for this, as this is to test how far you get on your own.

Check `common/lib/mqtt-messages`:

✅ Implement the same procedure, but by using an MQTT hierarchy. Subscribe by subscribing to all "command" messages, combining `cmd_topic_fragment(uuid)` with a trailing `#` wildcard.

✅ Use `enum Command` instead of `enum ColorData`. `enum Command` represents all possible commands (here: just `BoardLed`).

✅ `RawCommandData` stores the last part of a message topic (e.g. `board_led` in `a-uuid/command/board_led`). It can be converted into a `Command` using `try_from`.

```rust
// RGB LED command
let raw = RawCommandData {
    path: command,
    data: message.data(),
};
```

Check the `host-client`:

✅ you will need to replace `color` with `command`. For example, with this:

```rust
let command = Command::BoardLed(color)
```

### Other Tasks

✅ Leverage [`serde_json`](https://docs.serde.rs/serde_json/) to encode/decode your message data as JSON.

✅ Send some messages with a large payload from the host client and process them on the microcontroller. Large messages will be delivered in parts instead of `Details::Complete`:

```rust
InitialChunk(chunk_info) => { /* first chunk */},
SubsequentChunk(chunk_data) => { /* all subsequent chunks */ }
```

💡 You don't need to differentiate incoming chunks based on message ID, since at most one message will be in flight at any given time.

## Troubleshooting
<!-- DELETE this section? its the same as 3.5.2 -->
- `error: expected expression, found .` When building host client: update your stable Rust installation to 1.58 or newer
- MQTT messages not showing up? make sure all clients (board and workstation) use the same UUID (you can see it in the log output)
