# I²C

## Introduction

The I2C (Inter-Integrated Circuit) protocol allows multiple peripheral chips to communicate with one or more controller chips. Many devices can be connected to the same I2C bus and messages can be send to a particular device by specifying its I2C address. The protocol requires two signal wires and can only be used for short distance communications within one device. 

One of the signal lines is for data (SDA) and the other is for the clock signal (SCL). An I2C transaction consists of one or more messages. Each message begins with a start symbol. A message is either write or read, indicated by the next bit in the row. Following this comes the actual message in form of bytes. The message ends with a stop symbol. The clock signal rises and falls in a specified frequency.

TODO I2C signal image




## I2C Driver Exercise

TODO `i2c-driver/exercise/src/imc42670p.rs` is a gap text of a very basic i2c IMU sensor driver. The task is to complete the file, so that running `main.rs` will log the device ID of the driver. The this gap text driver is based on the version of the same name that lives in common, but provides a little bit more functionality.

TODO `i2c-driver/exercise/src/main.rs` contains working code. Running it without modifying the driver file will yield errors. 

`i2c-driver/solution/src/imc42670p.rs` provides a solution to the task. 

## I2C Sensor Reading Exercise

TODO `i2c-sensor-reading/exercise/src/main.rs` is an exercise skeleton that will build. The task is to use an existing driver from crates.io to read out the temperature and humidity sensor over i2c. After that, a second sensor will be read out over the same i2c bus using `shared-bus`. The driver for the second sensor is available locally in `common/`.

`i2c-sensor-reading/solution/src/main.rs` contains a working solution.


